Project Gutenberg's Rago and Goni, The Tree-Dweller Children, by Belle Wiley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Rago and Goni, The Tree-Dweller Children

Author: Belle Wiley

Release Date: July 9, 2019 [EBook #59876]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RAGO AND GONI ***




Produced by Tim Lindell, David E. Brown, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









  RAGO AND GONI

  THE TREE-DWELLER CHILDREN


  [Illustration]




  RAGO _and_ GONI

  THE TREE-DWELLER CHILDREN

  BY
  BELLE WILEY

  SUPERVISOR OF METHODS IN ENGLISH, CITY NORMAL SCHOOL, ROCHESTER,
  N. Y.; AUTHOR OF “THE CHILDREN OF THE CLIFF,” “LODRIX, THE
  LITTLE LAKE DWELLER,” “MEWANEE, THE
  LITTLE INDIAN BOY,” “THE MOTHER
  GOOSE PRIMER”

  [Illustration]

  D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
  NEW YORK




  COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY
  D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

  Printed in the United States of America




  THIS STORY IS DEDICATED TO

  RUTH BENEDICT
  REGINA WILEY
  MAXINE WILEY
  JANE BENEDICT
  JULIAN WILEY, JR.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                            PAGE

     I.--THE TREE-DWELLER CHILDREN      1

    II.--THE RACE                      11

   III.--THEIR FOOD                    20

    IV.--THE ANIMALS                   28

     V.--THE HUNT                      37

    VI.--THE CLAN                      47

   VII.--THE FIRE                      54

  VIII.--THE SHELTER                   65

    IX.--THE ATTACK                    77

     X.--THE RETURN                    88




CHAPTER I

THE TREE-DWELLER CHILDREN


Rago and Goni were brother and sister.

They lived a long time ago in a country far, far away.

They were the first little boy and girl that we know anything about.

Rago and Goni lived among the tall trees on the wooded hill near the
river.

They lived with their mother and baby sister.

Rago was twelve years old and Goni was seven.

Baby sister was much younger. She was too little to take care of
herself.

  [Illustration]

Mother always carried her little girl with her.

Of course she could not carry her baby in her arms, for she needed her
hands for other things.

Sometimes the baby clung to a strong vine which her mother tied around
her waist.

Sometimes she just held fast to her mother’s waist or clung to her
neck.

One morning very early Rago awakened with a start.

He sat up and listened.

He had been fast asleep in the branches of the strong oak tree.

[Illustration]

Rago and Goni always slept in trees.

Really the trees were the only home Rago and Goni knew.

That night their mother had selected beds in the oak trees, because
the strong branches were woven together with vines.

  [Illustration]

These vines made good strong beds for the children.

Sometimes when there were no vines, the Tree-dwellers wove the slender
branches of the tall trees together.

This also made a strong bed to lie upon.

Very often the older Tree dwellers would just stretch themselves on a
strong branch for the night.

They would tie themselves to the branch to keep from falling.

Rago had been sleeping so soundly that he had to rub his eyes to make
himself wake up.

Then he looked down toward the foot of the tree.

There stood two huge panthers.

Rago was afraid, for he knew that the panthers could climb trees
quickly and easily.

“What shall I do, what shall I do?” he thought.

  [Illustration]

He was almost afraid to move for fear the panthers would rush right up
the tree.

Just then he heard his mother call softly from a nearby tree.

She too had seen the panthers.

She had already picked up her baby and put her upon her back.

The baby clung fast to her mother’s neck. She was frightened, for she
had been awakened from a sound sleep.

Goni was still fast asleep, she had not heard the fierce cry of the
panthers.

“Waken your sister, Rago,” called his mother, “she is fast asleep.”

“All right, mother,” he answered softly.

Rago sprang lightly from one branch to the other until he reached the
oak tree in which Goni slept.

  [Illustration]

He had to be very quiet so the panthers would not hear him.

Not a sound did he make so lightly did he go, and soon he reached the
tree in which Goni slept.

“Wake up, Goni, wake up, Goni,” whispered Rago. “The panthers are at
the foot of these trees.”

Goni sat up and began to cry. She was very frightened. “Hush, hush,
sister,” whispered Rago, “the panthers will hear you. Come, we must go
to another part of the forest.”

“Where is mother?” cried Goni.

“She is coming with baby sister,” whispered Rago. “Hurry, spring
lightly, so the panthers will not hear you.”

Rago and Goni did not stop to dress, for they wore no clothing.

Very nimbly they sprang from branch to branch and soon they reached
another part of the forest.

Their mother followed them with baby sister upon her back.

Soon they stopped to rest and listen.

The panthers had not heard them go, so softly did they move.

They were afraid the panthers might follow them, but when they stopped
to look they were not in sight.

How glad they were to be safe!

“The panthers were very near us that time,” said Rago.

“It is well we heard them before they reached us,” said mother.




CHAPTER II

THE RACE


“Help me weave the slender branches of this cedar tree together,
Rago,” said his mother. “Then I can put baby upon them and we can find
something to eat for breakfast.”

“Yes, I am very hungry and thirsty,” said Goni.

So Rago and his mother worked quickly and soon had a fine strong bed
woven.

Then mother laid baby sister upon it.

“Let us look to see that there are no tigers nor lions below,” said
their mother. “It would not be safe to climb down if there were.”

They looked carefully in all directions.

“See!” said Goni, “there are some wild horses, eating on the grassy
plain beyond the forest.”

“See that huge cave bear just going into his cave,” cried Rago.

“He certainly does look fierce,” said Goni.

“I suppose he will sleep all day,” said Rago.

“Let us climb down,” said Goni.

“Come,” said Rago, “I am ready.”

  [Illustration]

“Do not go far, children,” said their mother, “for it is still very
early and there are wild beasts about.”

  [Illustration]

“I must stay near by, to watch baby sister.”

“All right, mother,” said the children as they climbed down the tree.

“Let us go to the river for a drink of cool water,” said Goni.

“Come along,” said Rago, “but be careful and look sharply.”

So the brother and sister ran along very swiftly toward the river.

Suddenly they stopped. “I hear sounds,” whispered Rago.

“Listen, Goni! Where do the sounds come from?”

“They seem to come from the thicket close by.”

“Quickly, Goni, climb this tree!”

“See that pack of hyenas! They are stealing down to their cave.”

“How their cowardly eyes gleam!”

“It is well you heard them in the thicket, Rago,” said Goni.

  [Illustration]

“I wonder if my ears and eyes will ever be as sharp as yours, so that I
may know when the wild beasts are near?” said Goni.

“Oh, yes,” said Rago, “when you are a little older you will hear sounds
just as I do, Goni.”

“Let us run a race to the river in the trees,” said Rago.

“Ready, go!” and the brother and sister swung lightly from branch to
branch until they reached the river.

“Hurry, Goni, hurry or I shall get there first,” called Rago.

“I’m coming, Rago,” answered Goni.

“I will wait for you, Goni,” called Rago as he reached the river first.

They waited and listened a moment in the trees, then they dropped
lightly to the ground and ran to the water’s edge.

  [Illustration]

Quickly they dipped up the water with their hands and drank all they
wanted.

“Now let us go back to mother and baby sister,” said Goni.

“We can gather some nuts and berries on the way,” said Rago.

“Let us take the trail back.”

So the brother and sister started back. They listened and looked as
they ran.




CHAPTER III

THEIR FOOD


On their way back Rago and Goni stopped to eat berries and roots for
their breakfast.

They were hungry, so they ate heartily.

“See! here are some acorns, Goni,” called Rago. “Would you like some of
these to eat?”

“Yes, yes,” answered Goni, and she ran to where Rago was standing.

The children cracked the acorns with their strong, sharp teeth, and
ate the kernels quickly.

“Let us carry some nuts back to mother,” said Goni.

  [Illustration]

“She can not go far from baby sister.”

“Yes,” said Rago, “and here are some blueberries which mother will
like.”

“How shall we carry them?” asked Goni.

“If I had a rabbit’s skin we might carry the acorns in that,” said Rago.

“Rabbits’ skins make fine baskets.”

“You carry these branches with the berries on them, Goni, and I will
carry the nuts in my hands,” said Rago.

“If we should have to climb a tree suddenly, we can drop the nuts and
berries.”

“Now let us hurry back, or mother will wonder if we are safe,” said
Rago.

  [Illustration]

As they neared the place where their mother was, they shouted, “Mother!
Mother!”

“Here I am,” answered their mother, who was sitting on a branch in a
tall tree.

  [Illustration]

“Baby and I have been waiting for you.”

By this time baby sister was wide awake and her mother was singing to
her as she held her in her arms.

“Here, mother,” said the children, “here are some berries and acorns
for you.”

Rago had to climb the tree to hand the nuts and berries to his mother.

He had to climb with one hand, his other hand was full of nuts and he
carried the branches under his arm.

“Thank you, children,” said their mother, “I am glad to have the
berries and nuts, for I have had no breakfast.”

Baby sister smiled too, for she wanted breakfast also.

“Here are some nuts I cannot crack,” said their mother. “Will you crack
them for me?”

  [Illustration]

“Yes,” said Rago and he tried to crack the nuts with his teeth.

“I shall have to try a stone,” said Rago, “for I cannot crack them with
my teeth.”

He climbed down the tree and soon found a stone. The rough edges hurt
his hands, so he wound one end with grass.

This made a fine hammer and the nuts were soon cracked.

“Here, mother, are the nuts,” called Rago. “Are you coming down?”

“Yes,” answered his mother as she sprang nimbly from the tree. “Thank
you, Rago, that is a fine way to crack nuts when our teeth cannot crack
them. Now I shall take baby sister to the river for a drink.”




CHAPTER IV

THE ANIMALS


While their mother went to the river to get baby sister a drink of
water, the brother and sister played among the trees.

As they ran to and fro they stopped to listen to the call of the birds
and to watch the squirrels as they frisked about.

“What is that, Rago?” said Goni, pointing to something very near.

“They are wild hogs,” said Rago.

“See how the young ones gather close to their mother.”

  [Illustration]

“They are afraid to leave her.”

“Their mother is digging into the earth among the roots of the tree.
She is looking for food for her children,” said Rago.

“I wonder what those black things are that they are digging for,” said
Goni.

“Shall we see?” asked Rago, as he picked up his club and threw it
toward the wild hogs.

This frightened them and they dashed away, the young pigs following
their mother to the underbrush not far away.

When they had gone, Rago and Goni ran to the place where the mother hog
had been digging.

“See!” said Rago, “they were digging for truffles. Here is one, Goni,
eat it.”

Goni bit into the rough black truffle with her sharp teeth.

It was white inside. “I like it,” said Goni, as she ate the truffle.

“I have never eaten a truffle before.”

“Look, Goni!” cried Rago, “I think there must be a bee’s nest in that
hollow stump.”

“I should like some honey,” said Rago.

“But the bees might sting you,” said Goni.

“I won’t mind a bee’s sting,” answered Rago.

So Rago went toward the hollow stump. He looked in. It was filled with
sweet wild honey.

Rago put in his hand and filled it with the honey.

  [Illustration]

The bees didn’t like their nest being robbed.

They buzzed about Rago and stung him badly, but he didn’t care because
he was used to being hurt.

“Goni, come and eat some honey,” called Rago.

“No, no, Rago, I am afraid of the bees.”

“Then stay where you are and I will bring you some,” called Rago.

So Rago filled his hand again with honey and ran with it to Goni.

“Thank you, Rago,” said Goni, “I wish I were as brave as you are.”

“Some day you will be,” said Rago. “You are not as old as I am, Goni.”

“Come, let us go back.”

Rago picked up his club, because he felt safer when he carried it.

The brother and sister started back.

As they ran along they shouted, “Mother, we are coming.”

Suddenly they stopped. “Hush!” said Rago, as a little rabbit scampered
across their path.

“I shall catch that rabbit for dinner.”

“Let us be very quiet, Goni, and it will come back.”

“Come, crouch down so that the rabbit will think we are logs.”

“Now watch,” whispered Rago.

Soon the little rabbit scampered out of its hiding place.

  [Illustration]

Rago crept up quietly behind it.

Then he raised his club and with one sharp blow the little rabbit was
dead.

“See, Goni!” said Rago, holding up the rabbit, “won’t we have a fine
dinner!”




CHAPTER V

THE HUNT


“See, mother, what a fine rabbit I have caught,” cried Rago as he ran
up to his mother.

  [Illustration]

Rago sat down on the ground and began to skin the little rabbit with
his sharp stone knife.

He had made this knife himself from a smooth pebble by clipping off
flakes from one end, until it had a sharp point.

He left one end smooth so that it would not hurt his hand.

Then he had a splendid sharp knife which he could use for many things.

  [Illustration]

When he had skinned the rabbit he laid the skin on the ground to dry.

Then the sister and brother ate the rabbit’s flesh, which Rago cut
into strips.

“This is good,” said Goni, as she ate the raw flesh.

Rago cracked the bones with his stone hammer and sucked the marrow from
them.

“Here is a fine bone for you, Goni,” said Rago. “You can crack it with
your teeth.”

Suddenly Rago jumped to his feet. “What do I hear?” he said.

“Come, get into this fir tree quickly.”

They were just in time, for a huge rhinoceros came to the very spot
where the children had been sitting.

He went along slowly.

  [Illustration]

“I am glad we aren’t down there,” said Rago.

“The beast would have crushed us if we had been sitting there.”

“I am sure he can’t see us up here,” said their mother, “for the
rhinoceros cannot see very far away.”

“Is he a very fierce creature?” asked Goni.

“Yes, indeed,” answered Rago.

“No animal likes to meet the rhinoceros, he is so fierce and huge.

“He uses his tusked snout to strike with.

“Even the mammoth and fierce sabretooth fear him.

“He must be very angry at something.

“Watch him tear down that tall cedar tree.

“You can hear him grind the wood with his strong teeth.

  [Illustration]

“I wonder what he is so angry about.”

As they were watching the huge creature, they saw a man running in the
distance.

He was running toward the spot where the huge rhinoceros stood.

The man had a torch in his hand, and waved it as he ran.

  [Illustration]

Back of him were other men all running toward the rhinoceros.

They all carried burning torches.

“Who are these strange men?” asked Rago. “They are following the
rhinoceros.”

“I guess that is why he is so angry.”

“They are the Tree-dwellers who belong to the clan that lives some
distance away.”

“Why does the leader wear skins over his shoulder?” asked Goni.

“This shows that he is very brave,” answered their mother, “because he
must first kill the wild animals, before he can wear their skins.”

“See, he has feathers in his hair and a necklace about his neck.”

“Yes,” said their mother, “this necklace is made from the teeth of wild
beasts.

“These Tree-dwellers wear teeth strung on sinews about their necks, and
arms and ankles.

“This shows that they have killed many wild beasts, and they are very
proud to wear their teeth.

“The more necklaces and feathers and skins they have the braver they
are.”

“See how near the leader goes to the rhinoceros,” shouted Rago.

“All of the other men are following him, waving their firebrands.”

“They are driving him toward the steep cliff. Now he has almost reached
the edge,” cried Rago.

“He will surely fall.”

Just then the huge rhinoceros lost his footing and fell over the steep
cliff.

Then the leader with some of the men climbed down the cliff.

They knew that the beast was dead, and they wished to take back
trophies to show their clan how brave they had been.

“Our people will praise us,” said the leader, “when we take these
trophies back with us.”




CHAPTER VI

THE CLAN


“Mother, why can’t we live with those Tree-dwellers?” asked Rago.

“Let us go down and wait for the men. Maybe they will take us with
them.”

“I think they would,” answered their mother, “they are always ready to
make their clan larger.”

So they got down from the trees and squatted upon the ground.

As they sat there, they watched a herd of wild cattle coming slowly
along.

They were wandering toward the river for a drink of cool water.

“See, they have a leader,” said Goni.

“Yes,” said Rago, “cattle always follow their leader.”

“They will have to watch out for the wolves and bears.”

“The other day I saw a pack of wolves rush upon a herd of cattle,” said
Rago.

“They seized three young cattle and killed them.”

“Wolves are always ready for a feast,” said their mother.

“I think I hear the men coming back,” said Rago.

“They are going back by the trail. Let us call to them. They will hear
us.”

  [Illustration]

So Rago shouted very loudly. He shouted again and again.

The leader of the men heard the call.

“I hear someone calling,” he said. “Let us go into the forest and see
who it is.”

So all of the men went into the forest and soon came upon Rago and
Goni, who were sitting on the ground, with their mother and baby sister.

“Did you call?” asked the leader.

“Yes,” answered their mother. “Will you take us with you?

“We should like to join your clan.”

“Yes,” said the leader, “we shall be glad to have you.”

“Shall we have someone to play with?” asked Rago.

“Yes, there are many boys and girls in our clan,” answered the leader.

“You are very brave,” said Rago. “I watched you drive the huge
rhinoceros to the edge of the cliff.”

“I should like to be as brave as you are when I am a man.”

“We will teach you how to be brave,” said the leader.

“Come, let us start as it is getting late.”

So they all started off together.

Rago and Goni weren’t a bit afraid because they were with these brave
men.

“What is that?” asked Rago, pointing to the firebrand.

“This is a fire-torch,” said the leader; “when we carry these we need
not be afraid.

“Fire protects us from the wild beast.”

“And where do you get fire?” asked Rago.

“Not so very long ago we had a terrible storm in our forest. It
thundered and lightened.

“The lightning set fire to the trees in the forest.

“At first we Tree-dwellers thought that the fire was a terrible
monster. We were frightened and ran away from it.

“Then we learned that the fire would not harm us and that if we fed it
wood, it would burn on forever.

“When we have fire there is no need for swinging from tree to tree, for
we are safe on the ground.”

“Do the wild beasts fear the firebrands?” asked Rago.

“Yes,” answered the leader.

“May I use a firebrand?” asked Rago.

“Yes,” answered the leader. “You may light your own firebrand, and you
may help us feed the fire also.”

“I am glad we are going to live with you,” said Rago.

“We shall be glad to have you,” said the leader.




CHAPTER VII

THE FIRE


“I am tired and hungry,” said Goni.

“All right,” said the leader, “let us look for food.

“There are plenty of roots and nuts around here.”

“Here are some acorns, Goni; eat them.”

Rago found his own food as did all of the men.

After they had eaten all they wished they started off again.

“The trees might be safer,” said the leader, “for our torches have gone
out and it is getting late.”

“I can already hear the growls of the cave bear.”

“They have been asleep all day and are looking for a feast.”

“All for the trees!” shouted the leader.

So they all climbed the trees and nimbly swung from branch to branch.

“That largest horse is leading the herd up the trail.”

“I wonder if there are any wild beasts lying in wait for them!”

“Where do the horses go at night?” asked Goni.

  [Illustration]

“To the grassy plain outside the forest,” answered the leader.

“They have to eat the green grass which they find there.”

  [Illustration]

“Here we are,” said the leader, as all of the men suddenly jumped to
the ground.

There were many Tree-dwellers squatting around the fire.

One strong Tree-dweller woman was feeding the fire with huge cedar logs.

Some of the young boys were playing that a cave bear had come suddenly
upon them.

They had make-believe torches with which they were pretending to
frighten the fierce bear.

They all stopped and looked at Rago and Goni and their mother, who had
baby sister in her arms.

Baby sister began to cry when she saw so many people.

Goni clutched Rago’s arm.

“I am afraid, Rago,” said Goni.

Rago was frightened also. He didn’t go very near the fire.

“You need not be afraid,” said the leader. “The fire is our friend. It
will not hurt you.”

  [Illustration]

The children ran toward Rago and Goni and pushed them toward the fire.

“It will not hurt you,” they cried.

“It will keep you warm, and protect you from the wild beasts.

“See, here is some roasted squirrel’s meat which you may have.

“Taste it and see how good it is.”

Rago had never eaten roasted meat before.

“It is good,” said Rago. “I have never eaten roasted meat before.

  [Illustration]

“How did you learn that meat could be roasted?”

“One day, Strong-arm, the leader of our clan, threw down a squirrel
near the fire. It was so near that the fire scorched it.

“When Strong-arm ate the squirrel’s meat it tasted so good that he told
the other people in the clan about it.

“Since then we often roast our meat because we like it better than raw
meat.”

“Do you like roasted meat, mother?” asked Rago.

“Here is a piece of meat for you, baby sister,” said Goni.

“Come, sit down with us,” said the children.

“Strong-arm has something to show us.”

Strong-arm was sitting near the fire with the other Tree-dwellers about
him.

He was telling them all about the hunt that day.

He told them how the huge rhinoceros had fallen over the cliff.

He showed them the tusks, and teeth and claws.

The Tree-dwellers were all very much pleased, and they praised the men
for their bravery.

When he had finished talking, Strong-arm jumped up.

“Let us all play the hunt of today,” he said.

“You be the leader, Strong-arm,” they shouted.

“All right,” said Strong-arm; “let us pretend that the huge rhinoceros
is here and we will show you just what we did.”

  [Illustration]

So the men played the hunt.

They acted just as if it were real.

“This is our hunting dance,” said one of the children to Rago.

“We have a hunting dance every night after the men return from the hunt.

“These make us brave and teach us how to hunt together.

“They teach all of the people how to do their part.

“Some day we shall be brave enough to take part in a real hunt.”

“I hope to be brave enough to be a leader,” said Rago.

“Yes,” said the other child, “I do too.”




CHAPTER VIII

THE SHELTER


It was growing late and the Tree-dwellers were tired.

So they stretched themselves about the fire to sleep.

“I shall watch the fire tonight,” said one of the women.

“Why must someone watch the fire?” asked Rago.

“We must not let it go out,” answered Strong-arm, “for if we did we
would have no fire.”

“I do not wish to sleep on the ground,” said Goni. “I am afraid.”

“You may sleep in the trees if you wish,” said Strong-arm.

“Where will you sleep, Rago?” asked Strong-arm.

“I shall sleep on the ground,” answered Rago. “I am not afraid.”

So their mother found a bed in the evergreen trees for Goni and baby
sister.

She, too, stretched herself on a limb and tied herself tightly to it so
she would not fall.

There she could watch baby sister and Goni.

She could look down on the Tree-dwellers as they slept on the ground.

  [Illustration]

The trees sheltered them from the wind and rain.

So they slept through the long night.

All night long the woman Tree-dweller fed the fire. She did not sleep
for fear the fire would go out.

In the early morning the Tree-dwellers awoke.

Each one left the fireplace to go in search of food.

The mothers carried their babies with them, and did not go far away
from the fire.

The men went into the forest.

They left a woman in charge of the fire.

When Goni and baby sister awoke, Rago had already eaten his breakfast
of berries and roots, which he found near by.

  [Illustration]

He stood watching some women who were working among the evergreen trees.

He wondered what they were doing, as he watched them break off the
evergreen branches.

“Shall I help you carry them?” asked Rago.

“Thank you,” said the woman. “You may carry the branches to those young
trees near the fire. We shall follow you.”

Rago wondered what the women would do with the branches.

They soon came carrying armfuls of them.

Rago watched them bend down the tops of the young trees and tie them
together.

  [Illustration]

They wove the evergreens among them and piled larger branches against
the young trees to strengthen them.

“What are you making?” asked Rago.

“A shelter for our children, which will protect them from the cold and
rain.

“Now that it is cold and the trees have lost their leaves we need
shelter for our children.”

“Do not these evergreen trees protect you from the rain and snow?”
asked Rago.

“Not always,” answered the woman.

“We have carried our fire to the evergreen trees, because they are the
only trees which will protect us in the winter.

“But the needles of the evergreen trees do not protect us so well as
the leaves of the birch and oak trees.”

“I have never seen a shelter before,” said Rago.

“No,” said the woman, “this is the first house which the Tree-dwellers
have made.”

Rago went to the fire. The Tree-dweller woman was piling cedar logs
upon it.

“Where are all of the men?” asked Rago.

“They have gone into the forest to hunt,” answered the woman.

“Come, Rago,” called one of the boys, “let us go into the forest too.”

“What is your name?” asked Rago of the boy.

“My name is Long-head,” said the boy.

  [Illustration]

“How old are you, Long-head?” asked Rago.

“I am fourteen years old,” answered Long-head.

“I am twelve,” said Rago.

“Come along,” said Long-head, “here is a firebrand for you.”

Rago felt very big with the firebrand in his hand.

  [Illustration]

He wasn’t afraid to carry it.

Now he would not have to swing from branch to branch, but could walk
upon the ground. He would be safe while he carried the torch.

The two boys wandered into the forest.

At first they followed the trail, then they left the trail and went
into the denser part of the forest.

Long-head walked faster than Rago and soon got ahead.

Rago did not hurry, for he had many strange things to look at.

He was used to traveling in the trees, for he had never before had a
torch to protect him.

He felt very brave and safe as he walked along.




CHAPTER IX

THE ATTACK


Suddenly he stopped, for he heard a loud call.

“Help! help!” came from the distance.

“I’m coming,” shouted Rago, “I’m coming,” and he ran in the direction
of the call.

“Help! help!” came the call again, and this time Rago knew that it was
Long-head calling.

“I’m coming, I’m coming,” shouted Rago as he ran on as fast as he
could.

It was not very easy running, for the trees were very thick in this
part of the forest.

As he neared the spot from which the sound had come, he heard a fierce
growl.

Growl after growl he heard. “’Tis a wolf, ’tis a wolf,” he thought.

“Where is your torch, Long-head?” panted Rago, as he came up out of
breath.

He saw Long-head standing against the tree, and the wolf ready to
spring upon him.

Long-head was terribly frightened, for he could not defend himself
against the wolf.

His torch was out, and he had lost his club. He didn’t dare attempt to
climb the tree for fear the wolf would seize him.

Rago came up cautiously from behind. With one bound he waved his torch
before the eyes of the wolf.

The fire terrified the wolf and he made one leap for the thicket.

Then Long-head sank to the ground. He was weak with fright.

“He almost had me, that time,” said Long-head.

“He was upon me before I knew it. My torch had gone out and I was
waiting for you, when the wolf sprang toward me.

  [Illustration]

“He must have come from the thicket, because I didn’t see him until he
was upon me.”

“That certainly was a narrow escape,” said Rago.

“I am glad I heard you call.

“We must stay together now; my torch will protect both of us.”

“Let us find something to eat,” said Long-head.

So they walked on through the forest. They found nuts and roots and
fruits.

“Look out,” said Long-head, pointing to an opening in the hillside.

“That is the home of the cave bear. Don’t go too near.”

“The cave bears are asleep, aren’t they?” asked Rago.

“Yes, but they may wake up,” answered Long-head.

  [Illustration]

“I shouldn’t care to be attacked by a cave bear,” said Long-head.
“They certainly are fierce creatures.”

“What a fine patch of blueberries!” said Rago.

“Goni and baby sister would like some of these berries, I know. I wish
I might carry some to them.”

“I will show you how to make a basket,” said Long-head.

“Let us find some rushes.”

“There is a marshy place,” said Long-head, pointing to the river. “We
can find some rushes there.”

So the boys gathered the rushes and sat down upon the ground to make
the basket.

Long-head wove the rushes together for the bottom of the basket.

When he had tied the ends together at the top, he wove around the
sides, until the basket was deep enough. Then he fastened the rushes
tightly, so that the basket would be strong enough to hold the berries.

  [Illustration]

“What a fine basket,” said Rago. “I have never seen a rush basket
before.

“Now let me try to make one.” Then Rago wove a basket like the one
which Long-head had made.

“Mother will be pleased to see my basket,” said Rago.

“Now for the blueberry patch. We can fill our baskets.”

The two boys picked enough berries to fill their baskets.

“These baskets are very strong,” said Rago.

“Yes,” said Long-head. “Oak leaves make strong baskets, also.”

After they had filled their baskets the boys wandered about for a
while.

They watched the cattle going toward the stream for their evening’s
drink.

  [Illustration]

“Let us follow them,” said Long-head.

They enjoyed seeing the cattle wade knee-deep into the stream and drink
of the clear, cool water.

Both Rago and Long-head dipped their hands into the water. They filled
them and drank.

They were thirsty, for they had had no water all day.

“’Tis growing late,” said Long-head. “See, the sun is setting.

“The men will be coming back to the fire. Let us go back also.

“We shall have to tell them about the fierce wolf.”

“Will they play it?” asked Rago.

“Yes, indeed,” answered Long-head.




CHAPTER X

THE RETURN


When Rago and Long-head reached the fire, the men had already returned.

They were sitting on the ground about the fire.

Rago ran up to Goni, saying, “Here are some fine blueberries, Goni. I
thought you would like them.”

“Where did you get the basket, Rago?” asked Goni.

“I made it from rushes,” said Rago. “Long-head showed me how to make
it.

“Some day I will show you how to make a basket just like this one.

“Where is baby sister?” asked Rago.

“She is in there,” said Goni, pointing to the shelter.

“The wind is so cold that the children are in there.”

Rago walked over toward Long-head. He was talking to the men in a very
excited way.

Rago knew he was telling them of his narrow escape from the wolf.

The men were listening and asking questions.

“You must be more careful in the future, Long-head,” they said.

“You are a brave boy, Rago,” said Strong-arm. “We are glad you have
come to live with us.”

  [Illustration]

This pleased Rago very much.

“Let us play it,” said the men.

So they pretended that one man was the fierce wolf, and another played
that he was Rago.

Then the man who played that he was Rago rushed upon the wolf, waving
his torch in his eyes.

The Tree-dwellers were very much interested.

“Now let us play it,” said one of the older boys.

So the boys had their hunting dance. They were glad to play what the
men had played.

After the hunting dance the men told about the animals which they had
seen that day.

They pretended that they were animals and showed just how the animals
acted.

Strong-arm held up the skin of a gopher which he had killed.

He told how the gophers lived among the tall grass, and how quick one
had to be to catch them.

Strong-arm showed the other Tree-dwellers how he had caught this gopher.

Another man told how he had chased a cave bear back to its den with his
torch. He showed just how he had done this.

“Indeed, the fire is our friend,” he said, “for I could not have
frightened the cave bear without a torch.”

Rago listened while the man talked. He was anxious to learn, so he
could be brave.

One by one the men became drowsy and stretched themselves on the ground
near the fire.

“Where will you and Goni sleep tonight?” asked Rago of his mother.

“You need not be afraid to sleep on the ground. The fire will protect
you.”

“We shall sleep on the ground,” answered his mother. “Goni is not
afraid now.”

“Yes,” said Goni. “I shall sleep on the ground.”

One of the women took her place by the fire. She would watch all night
while the others slept.

Soon all was very quiet. The Tree-dwellers were fast asleep.

  [Illustration]

Only the sounds of the wild beasts could be heard as they hunted their
prey.

The Tree-dwellers were safe, because the fire would protect them.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:

  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Rago and Goni, The Tree-Dweller
Children, by Belle Wiley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RAGO AND GONI ***

***** This file should be named 59876-0.txt or 59876-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/8/7/59876/

Produced by Tim Lindell, David E. Brown, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

